---
layout: default
title: "Week 5: 13th Mar - 16th Mar"
---

## Key Technical Learnings

- Payslip Project
  - Usage of _BigDecimal_ in Java for accuracy
  - Refactoring a function away and into its own separate domain [Efficiency Improvement]
  - Refactoring the use of 'split' into a character parser

## Key Group Learning Activities

- Learning Lab: "Activate Your A-Game"
- Formal Workshop: "Networking Advanced" (Prateek & JC)
- Informal Workshop: _Docker_ (Tony)

***

## Payslip Project

Further progress was made on iteration 3 of my payslip project.

#### Usage of _BigDecimal_ in Java for accuracy:
- I refactored all calculations that involved dollar amounts that used _double_ and _int_ primitive types.
- My mentors noted several places in my code where I was performing mathematical operations with those primitive types, and therefore losing accuracy. I was reading about [the reason](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/322749/retain-precision-with-double-in-java/322875#322875) for this, being that these types are binary representations of numbers which aren't truly precise.
- I found a really long, technical, math-heavy monolith of an article that I aim to put here to revisit when I come back to this topic in future, as I'm sure I will: [What Every Computer Scientist Should Know About Floating-Point Arithmetic](https://docs.oracle.com/cd/E19957-01/806-3568/ncg_goldberg.html). There is a better, more modern interpretation here that I've added to my reading list for the coming weeks: [Floating Point Demystified, Part 1](http://blog.reverberate.org/2014/09/what-every-computer-programmer-should.html).

  ```go
  public void calculatePayslips() {
      for (EmployeeRecordInput item : employeeDataInputFromFile) {

          employeeTaxAttributes = new EmployeeTaxAttributes(item.getAnnualSalary(), taxRatesInputData);
          employeeTaxAttributes.calculateTaxRateBoundsBasedOnSalaryInput();

          BigDecimal grossSalaryAmt = item.getAnnualSalary().divide(MONTHS_PER_ANNUM,0,RoundingMode.HALF_UP);

          BigDecimal variableAmountCalculated =  item.getAnnualSalary().subtract(employeeTaxAttributes.getLowerBoundToUseInCalc());
          BigDecimal taxCalculatorComponentA = variableAmountCalculated.multiply(employeeTaxAttributes.getVariableTaxAmountToUseInCalc());
          BigDecimal taxCalculatorComponentB = taxCalculatorComponentA.add(employeeTaxAttributes.getFixedTaxAmountToUseInCalc());
          BigDecimal calculatedTaxAmountTotal = taxCalculatorComponentB.divide(MONTHS_PER_ANNUM, 0,RoundingMode.HALF_UP);

          BigDecimal superPercentage = item.getSuperPercentage().divide(SUPER_PERCENTAGE_DIVISOR,2,RoundingMode.HALF_UP);
          BigDecimal superCalculated = grossSalaryAmt.multiply(superPercentage).setScale(0,RoundingMode.HALF_UP);

          EmployeeRecordOutput output = new EmployeeRecordOutput(
              (item.getFirstName() + " " + item.getLastName()),
              item.getPaymentPeriod(),
              grossSalaryAmt,
              calculatedTaxAmountTotal,
              superCalculated
          );

          employeePayslipDataCalculated.add(output);
      }
  }
  ```


#### Refactoring a function away and into its own separate domain [Efficiency Improvement]:
- Background:
  - Within my payslip project, I expressed to my mentors how I felt that my _PayslipCalculator_ class was somewhat inefficient and didn't have a good 'feel' to the way it set the lower bound and upper bound for the tax rate calculations for each employee in question.
  - My algorithm was looking at each employee passed in one by one, getting the annual salary, passing that to a function that then looked at what tax bracket that should fit in, by searching each tax bracket from bottom to top (ie. $0 to $18,200 being bracket 1, $18,201 to $37,000 being bracket 2, etc). This worked correctly, but perhaps not as efficiently as it could be.
  - Although this is a small exercise, we should always consider scale, and therefore, inefficient code becoming a major issue.
- Refactored Solution:
  - I didn't get direct feedback from my mentors about this factor, other than to think about making a separate domain model specifically for this issue.
  - I decided to make a new class called _EmployeeTaxAttributes_ that just handled this lower/upper bound setting behaviour, and removing that function from the _PayslipCalculator_.
  - After doing some research online about efficiently searching between bounds, specifically for a range, I came across Java's inbuilt method by calling __Arrays.binarySearch__. It brought back memories of binary search trees from Algorithms classes at University after seeing how it's implemented.
  - I have now got the upper/lower bounds check being performed within an array that's set by pulling from the tax rates input file, and those bounds are filled in a simple Java array.
  - When an employee salary is passed through, it then performs an efficient binary search on that array and returns either the index of where it should be (ie. its correct tax bracket) or the index that it is actually located at (if the taxable income is exactly the amount that is equal to the bound amount).
  - I may be incorrect here, but I believe this has reduced the bounds search complexity time from __O(n)__ to __O(log n)__.

    ```go
    public void calculateTaxRateBoundsBasedOnSalaryInput() {
      int annualSalaryInt = Integer.parseInt(annualSalary.toString());
      int search = Arrays.binarySearch(taxRateBounds,annualSalaryInt);

      int indexOfSearch = search;

      if (search < 0) {
          indexOfSearch *= -1;
          indexOfSearch -= 1;
      }

      setFixedVariableDollarsAndLowerBounds(indexOfSearch);
    }
    ```

#### Refactoring the use of 'split' into a character parser
- Background:
  - Within my payslip project, there is some string manipulation required within the input file - in particular, the input file prescribes that the percentage amount for superannuation is written as "x%", with x being represented as an integer on the specification, but it could also be a floating style value. The important factor here is that a percentage symbol is included.
  - To extract the percentage symbol away, and just retrieve the numerical value, I initially used the __.split__ method within Java's _String_ class.
  - Based on mentor feedback, this could present a dangerous situation if the user input is not exactly following the prescribed input format. There is some debate about [this online, too](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/998997/should-i-avoid-regular-expressions).
- Solution:
  - For safety, I refactored the functionality of this block to act more as a character parser, just taking characters that are _only_ digits, specifically, and discarding the rest.
  - This way, even if other characters are written in that data element, it's still able to find digits and use those for it's super calculation.

    ```go
    private String extractNumericalValuesFromSuperPercentage(String superValueInput) {

      StringBuilder stringBuilder = new StringBuilder();

      for (char charInSuperStringInputted : superValueInput.toCharArray()) {
          if (Character.isDigit(charInSuperStringInputted)) {
              stringBuilder.append(charInSuperStringInputted);
          }
      }
      return stringBuilder.toString();
    }
    ```


## Learning Lab: "Activate Your A-Game"

Background:
- This workshop was conducted by Dr Cory Middleton on 13 March 2018.
- It was a 2 hour workshop where I learned about recognising and understanding our mindset as human beings, and how to get the most of out of ourselves. The mindset we take towards what we do every day is a choice - be aware of it. Control it.
- The facilitator was from a sports psychology background, having previously worked with top athletes at the Australian Institute of Sport.

Workshop Notes:
- __Activity: "Draw a portrait of your partner"__
  - In this activity we had two minutes to draw a portrait of our nearest seated neighbour.
  - The outcome of this activity was to demonstrate to us that people often go into a task with preconceived ideas of their abilities. Some people, like myself, were apologising to their partner before we'd even finished. It showed that we went into the task without thinking it was going to be good, right from the beginning.
  - Am I bought in? How serious am I going to take this?
  - `Key Takeaway:` Preconceived notions of what I'm capable of are a choice that I subconsciously make. It's easy to go into starting a task without truly believing you can make a solid attempt to do it really well to the best of your ability.

- __Conceptual Note: The process, NOT the setting of goals...__
  - The facilitator mentioned that a typical business approach is 'strategy in' -> 'results out'. Quarter-by-quarter style of thinking.
  - In reality, 'stuff' gets in the way every day.
  - We brainstormed together in small groups about what might get in the way of achieving goals. Some of these included:
    - Setting unclear goals
    - Doubting ourselves
    - Setting goals too ambitious, perhaps out of our control
    - Having too many goals, putting too much self-pressure on
    - Higher priority tasks coming up day-to-day __This was the important one__
  - Setting SMART goals is important, but really it's more about the _process_ of achieving those goals that's the hard part - and generally navigating your life around things that get in the way of achieving them.

- __Activity: "A variety of handshakes"__
  - In this activity we had to shake the hands of other people in the room, pretending various scenarios existed. For example, the first handshake was with someone when you know someone else in the room is important, the next was that you think the person is suspicious, next, that they're very important, and finally, that they're a long, lost friend.
  - `Key Takeaway:` We make a subconscious choice about how our body behaves based on what we are thinking. The body will follow what the mind decides.

- __Conceptual Note: A-Game vs F-Game - Two opposite ends of the spectrum__
  - The facilitator started by talking about what it's like to be in your "F-Game".
  - __F-Game__ notions:
    - Feeling stressed
    - Feeling defensive
    - Everything is overwhelming
    - Feeling frustrated
  - __P.L.O.M.__ "Poor Little Old Me" is the common expression used to indicate someone on their F-Game. Everything is someone else's fault, the world is against them. They gossip. They complain.
  - PLOM's are infectious. They bring others down with them. _"Misery loves company"_.
  - If you get feedback from your mentors/managers in this state, you become standoffish in this state, because you're obsessed with the problem.
  - __A-Game__ notions:
    - Feeling happy
    - Feeling confident
    - Feeling relaxed
    - You have drive, you're awake and ready to go
    - You don't see failures as errors - you see them as learning opportunities.
  - `Key Takeaway:` Notice how many people make a conscious decision to be stuck in the "PLOM"/F-Game state. It's their choice to be there. Why? Because people who are in their A-Game are feeling the same frustrations too, but they don't let it get to them and allow others to bring them down. They brush little annoyances away, they focus on the goal, the outcome, the result. They find a way.

- __Conceptual Note: The psychology of this behaviour...__
  - Understanding attitude = control
  - A 'sense of approval' is a common way of driving you from A -> F. That is, from anyone - a manager, a mentor). Not noticing progress and getting criticism back only is something that can drive you down, if you're in that F-Game mindset.
  - Things like: results, being valued, sense of belonging, respect, talent (recognition) are all things that can drive you between A -> F and F -> A.
  - Note: these are all 'feel' type things. They are on the exterior, outside. It's reactive.
  - The psychologists call this an __outside-in__ way of thinking. You react to the outside world and it drives you. Toughness and resilience is not coming from this.
  - Compare this to people on their A-Game that think more __inside-out__. They control what they can.
  - `Key Takeaway:` If you want motivation and confidence, it comes from within.

- __STRATEGIES__
- __STRATEGY 1: Sheer will is not enough... Focus on mastery__
  - Mastering the discipline in a repetitive manner will shape your behaviour
  - Physical analogy - the facilitator asked a volunteer to push their up towards the force of him pushing down on it with his fingers, and the volunteer came down within a few seconds. The facilitator then asked the volunteer to focus on a part of the wall and imagine their arm was connected via a strong impenetrable cable. The volunteer then appeared to be much stronger when the facilitator was pushing down.
  - If you focus on the method, you get more out of yourself.
  - Think about the 'race plan' - a very sporting term, but it's applicable to our workplace.
  - Analogy to the 'pressure cooker' situation. No need to be a perfectionist. Getting good at mastering something takes time, and we can be quick to judge whether we did something 'good' or 'bad'.
  - `Key Takeaway:` Mastery takes time, energy and commitment. Don't be quick to claim that you screwed something up - focus on it being a learning experience in getting better. World class athletes train daily to master their own crafts.

- __STRATEGY 2: Anticipate obstacles... And choose your response__
  - The facilitator used an analogy with a balloon blowing up and getting to the point of deflating quickly and running out of energy.
  - A day of all good things in a row and one little thing that deflates you can really bring you down.
  - What are those 'little pricks'? Little things that annoy you.
  - A-Game thinking: _"Don't cry over spilled milk"_.
  - Extraordinary things are created twice: mentally, and then physically. Analogy: architect building a house. Little prick moments when in PLOM behaviour can mean you are limited by these obstacles.
  - `Key Takeaway:` Frustrations are often only temporary, move on. Awareness is the key - use the provided A-Game Wristband for a week. Change wrists when you feel a PLOM moment has entered your mind. Be aware of it, and move on.

- __STRATEGY 3: Progress over perfection__
  - Perfectionists often fall into a thinking trap. We're about learning, perfection isn't critical.
  - We can be quick to judge our failures. Compounding these can get you down to F-Game behaviour.
  - Use a _1. Learn -> 2. Change -> 3. Celebrate_ style mind-map to judge yourself in a different way. Focus on learnings.
  - Do this for 1 month daily in a diary until you become familiar with this style of thinking.


## Formal Workshop: "Networking Advanced"

This workshop built upon our previous (fairly simple) workshop on networking. This time, we looked into the importance of knowing your subnet masks in order to communicate between Amazon AWS instances. This was run by JC and Prateek.

Key learnings:
- You can't deploy anything unless you have a VPC - an enclosed network where things internal can talk to each other
- A VPC is region specific
- By default, a VPC cannot talk to the rest of the internet. You need an Internet Gateway - IGW - (it’s a logical connection, no IP address). A gateway to the outside, interfaces with the outside world
- Availability zones - the physical location of the data centres. 3 in Sydney.
- Multi AZ = multi location = “High Availability”. Important to exist in multiple places for redundancy
- “Architecture is designed with failure in mind”. Failure is the normal scenario, and let’s plan for it
- Availability zones important because of subnets - you subdivide space in your VPC further in your zones. Subnets are tied to Availability zones
- eg. VPC 172.31.0.0/16
    - but for Availability zone A: we have 172.31.0.0/20,
    - for B we could have 172.31.16.0/20
    - Subnets cannot expand over AZ’s
    - VPC’s are bound to regions? CHECK
    - AZ’s are separate from each other. But they can communicate with each other. Subnets must be AZ specific.
- In AZ’s: Public and private separated subnets too. Things on the public subject will refer to a special object. “NACL”. Private subnets - NACL
- Routing Table
    - Same concept as on Mac locally
- AWS has routing table too. eg. 10.1.0.0/16. This is the target destination. Main target. Then the wildcard 0.0.0.0.
    - Route table entry is what determines if it’s public or private. Doesn’t matter it’s name.
- Subnet within the VPC. Hops directly between subnets in the VPC between AZ’s, but if it needs to then talk to the MYOB server, it goes via 0.0.0.0 externally. Don’t need to route via entire internet to talk to other subnet
- Security Group - Another list of things it allows to get in. Set of inbound/outbound rules.
- Ports. Services run on ports
    - Note: ephemeral ports - 49152 upwards. Temporary ports. Usually used to return info back to you.
- Sensible defaults
    - Apps should ALWAYS be on the private subnet.
- “ELB” Load balancer - if your app is sitting in the private subnet. You need to talk to it. Create a load balancer in the public subnet. Then that talks to private. They also have their own security groups. The load balancer will have a DNS. Can access that from anywhere.


## Informal Workshop: Docker (Tony)

Docker is a lightweight containerisation application ecosystem, a Virtual-Machine style of separating an OS for different purposes, such as to run applications or dependences on the same OS but in separate containers that don't interfere with each other. I'd used Docker a little before joining MYOB but never really understood their true purpose and usages.

Key learnings:
- On Mac, to get Docker: Install with Cask, extension from Home-brew
- Docker doesn’t run natively on Mac OS X, it is designed for linux LXC containers
- Docker does what a VM does, but not the whole thing. Isolates apps from each other. Lightweight - virtualises from the OS onwards.
- Each container should run one app
- Typical size is usually in low 100mb’s, since it doesn’t need to be huge because it’s not the whole OS.
- Run Docker now from Mac OS. It’s now a client VM that’s running for you. Linux VM on my Mac.
- Docker server and client you can see by doing ‘docker version’. Connect via client that goes INTO server. This is ‘Docker Engine’. Other docker tools too. Also: Docker Hub - like GitHub for docker images. There’s a whole ecosystem, it’s not just containers.
- Building an image: refer to Tony's blog - https://tsukiyo.io/posts/what-is-docker/
- Next steps: Installing Node
- Then: docker build -t tests-image .
- If you want to make changes to your app thats running in the container, you would usually remove that container, make changes, then re-build a new container and use that new one.

***

# Books, books, books

This week I didn't make much progress in my reading. I will focus on this more next week.

***

[[Top]](#top)
